---
date updated: 2021-08-12 10:45

notetype: "Math Class Note"
cssclass: math-class-note

tags: 
- '#classnotes'
---

## [[2001.8 Statistical Simulation]]
Part of [[@Stats Index]]


We have modeling and likelihood estimation. Now, we need to present our results. How?

Statistical simulation! (which can be used for many things)


#### Parameter Simulation

We assume the model is correct. MLE estimated $\hat{\theta}$. As $n$ grows large, the sampling distribution of $\thetahat$ approaches a spike over true value $\theta$ (LLN) and becomes normal (CLT). Also the quadratic approximation improves. 

We estimate $V(\thetahat)$ with $\hat{V}(\thetahat)$. This is the standard error (See lecture 7). 

#### How to Simulate: General Form

We want to use our model to estimate not only the $\theta$, but also any other quantity of interest. 

Start with generalized max likelihood model:
$$
\begin{array}{l}
Y_i & \sim & f(\theta_i, \alpha) \\
\theta_i & \sim & g(x_i, \beta) \\
\end{array}
$$

** Estimation Uncertainty **

Parameters $\alpha$ and $\beta$ (call them $\gamma$ together) we can estimate with ML - $\gammahat$. We can also estimate $\hat{V}(\gammahat)$. 

We can then estimate the estimation uncertainty (uncertainty due to our finite sample) with the CLT: $\tilde{\gamma} \sim \mathcal{N}[\gammahat, \hat{V}(\gammahat)]$. 

This is our best guess as to what it would be like to estimate $\gamma$ by drawing from the population repeatedly. 


** Fundamental Uncertainty **

Choose some values of $X$ - call it $X_c$. Then calculate $\tilde{\theta}_c = g(X_c, \tilde{\beta})$  - recall that we found $\tilde{\beta}$ as part of $\tilde{\gamma}$ earlier. 
 
Now we can look at the fundamental uncertainty. We can draw $\tilde{y}_c \sim f(\tilde{\theta}_c, \tilde{\alpha})$. This lets us estimate the fundamental uncertainty in $y$ - in other words the variation attributable to things we aren't looking at. 

So we have a distribution of $y$ - and now we can get a histogram, a mean, a variance, $P(y > .5)$, whatever we want.

