---
aliases:
creation date: Friday, September 2nd 2022, 5:09 pm
date updated: Monday, September 12th 2022, 11:41 am

notetype: "Math Class Note"
cssclass: math-class-note

tags: 
- '#types/classes/stats/theory'
- '#topics/methods'
- '#status/🚧'
---

# [[Econometrics II - Working with Random Variables]]


## Random Variables

### Definitions

A random variable $X$ is a mapping from $\Omega$ to some $\Omega_X \subseteq \R$. Example: if we have $\Omega$ be a survey of a number of people on employment status - unemployed, FT employed, PT employed. Then $X: \Omega \to \{ 0,1 \}$ might be $X = 0$ if unemployed, $1$ otherwise. 

Note: the randomness here comes from the underlying state of the world $\Omega$. The RV is just reflecting that. 

So now we want to create a probability measure on random variables. We can do this simply: 

$$P(X \in [a,b]) = P(\{ \omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) \in [a,b] \})$$
In other words, the preimage of $[a,b]$. We can generalize this to any set $B \subseteq \Omega_X$: 
$$P(X \in B) = P(\omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) \in B)$$
We can write $P(X \in B)$. But this is just notation. The above is the real definition. 

This lets us say that at least $\Omega_X$ contains $\{ X(\omega): \omega \in \Omega \}$. This doesn't restrict us: e.g. in the unemployment event above have $\Omega_X = [0,1]$, and only have nonzero probability at the endpoints. We might want that for convenience. 

### Measure Theory Conditions

We know probability only exists for subsets of $\Omega$ that are in $\mathcal F$. So we need to make sure that $\{ \omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) \in B \}$ is in $\mathcal F$. Let $\mathcal B(\Omega_X)$ be the Borel $\sigma$-field generated by $\Omega_X$. We will only assign probabilities to sets in $\mathcal B$. 

We say that $X$ is a _measurable_ function from $(\Omega, \mathcal F)$ to $(\Omega_X, \mathcal B(\Omega_X))$ if $\forall \; B \in \mathcal B$, $\{\omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) \in B\} \in \mathcal F$ (that is to say, every set in $\mathcal B$ has a preimage in $\mathcal F$). #status/section/🚧. Random variables will be measurable by definition. In practice, it's actually hard to construct nonmeasurable functions. So this is not a major concern. 

### Distribution of ${\small X(\omega)}$
We can also write $P(\{ \omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) \in B\})$ as $P_X(B)$. Thus we can say $X$ and the distribution of $\Omega$ <font color=gree>induces</font> some distribution.

$P_x$ satisfies the probability axioms: 
- Non-negativity: Each $B$ has a preimage with $0$ or more $\omega$, meaning that non-negativity follows from non-negativity of $P$ on $\Omega$. 
- $P_X(\Omega_X) = 1$: $P_X(\Omega_X)$ is $\{ \omega \in \Omega : X(\omega) \in \Omega_X \}$. But $\Omega_X$ is simply all those points that have some preimage $\omega$ in $\Omega$. Thus, $P_X(\Omega_X) = P(\Omega) = 1$. 
- Countable additivity of disjoint events. Suppose $B_1,B_2, \ldots$ are disjoint in $\mathcal B$. We know that $X$ is a function, so every $\omega$ corresponds to at most one element of the $B$s. So the preimages of each of the $B_i$ are disjoint; so we can infer this from countable additivity of $P$. 

This creates a probability space: $(\Omega_X, \mathcal B(\Omega_X), P_X)$. 

### Asides

Random vectors - basically the same deal. 

A stochastic process is a random variable, but instead of being real-valued, it's function-valued. 


## Distributions 