---
date updated: 2022-04-19 13:00

notetype: "Math Class Note"
cssclass: math-class-note

tags: 
- '#types/classes/stats/regression'
- '#status/🚧'
---

# [[2002.7 Regression - Diagnostics and Corrections]]
[[Gov 2002]]


## Non-normality of Errors

If the true errors are not normal, we may want to know. This would mean that our small-sample performance is worse - we don't get the guarantees that come with consistency and asymptotic normality - meaning $p$ values, confidence intervals and other metrics of the sampling distribution will be misstated. 

It's hard to see $u$ - you have to estimate it with $\uhat$. 

#### Residuals, analytically

$$\begin{aligned}
\uhat &= y - X\betahat \\
&= y - X(X'X)^{-1}X'y \\
&= y - Hy\\
&= (I - H)y \\
\end{aligned}
$$
Here, we've created a new matrix $H$, where $H = X(X'X)^{-1}X'$, where $Hy = \yhat$. $H$ is called the <font color=gree>projection matrix</font>, or hat matrix. 

We also have $(I-H)$, such that $(I-H)y$ is the residuals. We call this $M$ - the <font color=gree>annihilator matrix</font> - which turns $y$ into its residuals. 

$H$ and $M$ are both symmetric. They are both *idempotent*: $HH = H, MM = M$.

We can use the above to get a sense of the residuals as an estimate of the true errors:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\uhat &= My \\
&= M(X\beta + u)\\
&= MX\beta + Mu \\
&= X\beta - X(X'X)^{-1}X'X\beta + Mu \\
&= X\beta - X\beta + Mu \\
&= Mu
\end{aligned}
$$

This tells us that the residuals are a linear function of the true errors. So we can look at the normality of the residuals. 


To look at that, we standardize the residuals to $z$ scores, and then 'studentize' them. This lets us make e.g. a QQ plot of the residuals vs the $t$ distribution they should follow. 


## Clustered Standard Errors
Example: suppose you do some treatment to each household, then measure the effect on all the people in all the households. You need to cluster SEs at the household level, not the individual, to account for the fact that you don't actually have as many independent observations as you think.

#status/section/👻 

## Robust Standard Errors
Repetitive of much discussion at [[Robust Standard Errors]]

A particular, interesting thought from DH:

There are two use cases for RSEs. 
- I know nothing about the distribution of the DGP. Then I can use RSE as a non-parametric standard error measure. 
- I think my model might be misspecified. 
	- Ex: DGP is $y \sim x^2/5 - x^3/5 + u$ where $x$ is `runif(0,10)` and $u$ is `rnorm(0,10)`. Simulate sampling, estimate SEs - you will see that the classical SE wildly underestimates. RSE can get you right without changing your functional form. 
	- King, Gelman etc: fix your model then lol