---
date updated: 2022-03-13 16:14

notetype: "Math Class Note"
cssclass: math-class-note

tags: 
- '#classnotes/stats/foundations'
---

# [[2002.3 Hypothesis Testing]]

- [[#Null Hypothesis|Null Hypothesis]]
- [[#$p$-values|$p$-values]]
- [[#Test it|Test it]]
- [[#Difference in means test|Difference in means test]]

Why though

#### Null Hypothesis

Construct a null hypothesis. Often 'no effect' for social science findings - e.g. a beta of 0.

Our goal is to figure out whether or not we can reject the null hypothesis $H_0$ in favor of alternative hypothesis $H_A$. 

First, we arbitrarily decide $\alpha$, a threshold for significance. Choosing $\alpha = 3\%$, for instance, means that, under $100$ repeated samples, we would falsely reject the null about 3 times. 

The literature uses $5\%$ because Fisher did one time, and now it's a Nash equilibrium in the $\alpha$-choosing game.

#### $p$-values

A confidence interval, but worse. The $p$-value is our estimate of: if the null hypothesis were true ('under the null'), how frequently would we observe results as extreme as ours, or more so?

For instance, imagine flipping a coin $10$ times. You come out with $9$ heads. Is this coin tilted towards heads? Of $2^{10} = 1024$ possible combinations, ${10 \choose 9} + {10 \choose 10} = 11$ have $9$ or more heads. So if we were flipping a fair coin 10 times over and over again, we'd see $9$ or more heads $11/1024 = 1\%$ of the time. 


#### Test it

The testing is simple. Compare a test statistic - say a $p$-value - to a 'rejection region' based on $\alpha$ to see how likely it'd be to observe our data under the null (there are other test statistics, all basically the same). If it's sufficiently unlikely, reject. 

Constructing the 'rejection region' is based on $\alpha$, but also if a test is one- or two- sided. I can pick 3 different $H_0$:
- the coin is fair
- the coin is not biased heads
- the coin is not biased tails

Suppose we choose number 2. Then, the 'rejection region' is the area of the test-statistic distribution  $[a, \infty]$ such that  $F(a) = .95$. In the above coin example, that rejection region would be about $8$ or more heads. So we can reject the null hypothesis. (We could also say our results are significant at the $1\%$ level - whichever makes the finding look better I guess.)

If we had hypothesis 3, we could _not_ reject the null. We have no evidence it is biased towards tails - the complement of $H_0$ (an example of needlessly discarding information - not only can we fail to reject $H_0$, but we can also say it's likely biased towards heads!).

Failing to reject the null is not the same as finding evidence for the null. It is evidence _against_ whatever the alternative hypothesis was. It could be that $H_A$ is the complement of $H_0$, but that's often not the case - consider the second and third $H_A$ above.

Rejecting the null doesn't mean your finding is good. You could find a tiny effect with a great $p$-value, and nobody will care.

#### Difference in means test

$$ \text{Test Statistic} = \frac{\mu_A - \mu_B}{\sqrt{S_A^2/n_A + S_B^2/n_B}}$$