---
date updated: 2022-04-07 17:26

notetype: "Math Class Note"
cssclass: math-class-note

tags: 
- '#classnotes'
- '#🚧'
---

# [[2002.5 Regression]]
Part of [[@Stats Index]]

## Controlling For Things
Baby's first causal inference (it's me, I'm the baby)

Why have more than one variable? One important case is that of *controlling* for things. 

### Confounders

Recall from [[2001.14 Research Design]] the possibility of imbalanced treatments, or *confounders*. For this purpose, let's say a confounder is anything that affects both the probability of being treated and the outcome variable. This will interfere with our estimation of the treatment.

Consider the classic example of estimating the differential effect of pipe and cigarette smoking by comparing mortality in the two populations. The cigarette smokers were found to have less mortality than the pipe smokers, despite cigarettes being more addictive and nicotine-intensive.

The problem is that being old affects both mortality and the choice of pipe vs cigarettes. So the estimator above is picking up a mix of cigarette vs pipe effects and age effects.


### Controlling for Confounders

So how to deal with confounders? There are, of course, a lot of ways. In the regression context, we can think about adding a covariate. Consider the cigarette-pipe example below. We can estimate this model:

$$ \text{Mortality} = \betahat_0 + \betahat_1 [\text{Cigarette Smoker}] + \hat{u}$$
I'd like to note that this is going to indicate the same $\betahat_1$ as the uncontrolled difference-in-means estimator above. Given that our sample is entirely smokers of some sort, $\betahat_0$ will pick up the general mortality effect of smoking anything at all; $\betahat_1$ will pick up the effects of cigarette smoking - including the degree to which cigarette smoking is related to age, which effects mortality. So our coefficient will be biased downward. 

We can deal with this by adding a covariate: age.
$$ \text{Mortality} = \betahat_0 + \betahat_1 [\text{Cigarette Smoker}] + \betahat_2 [\text{Age}] + \hat{u}$$
This will help us get rid of the *Omitted Variable Bias*.

