---
date updated: 2021-11-01 15:14

notetype: "Math Class Note"
cssclass: math-class-note

tags: 
- '#classnotes'
---

# [[2001 11-1]]
Part of [[@Stats Index]]

Gary out sick

Visitor: Andy Hall, Stanford
- Difference-in-differences  for adoption of vote-by-mail: for Washington, Cali, Utah, different counties had staggered implementation of VBM. 
	- as-if random assignment
	- the counties that turned this on earlier were not trending one way or the other before? the counties opted in
	- assumption is parallel trends, so we can actually assess this (since the finding is no effect, it's a case for that?) 
		- Maybe there's some unobserved trend with negative covariance? But very little evidence that that was a strategic decision
		- A little less data, so validation is less possible, but null effect helps.
		- The validation they did was the leads of treatment effect as well as the treatment effect. The leads should be zero
			- Interestingly, some amt of trending? all the leads were close to 0 but some weird time-series pattern? not a large effect and hard to see
	- qualitatively examined drivers of adoption - election officials said it was mostly due to administrative stuff
- we can use the not-yet-implemented counties to counterfactually look at the impact of VBM
- find that the effects are smaller than one would think - more or less zero
- didn't use matching because there weren't obvious covariates and there wasn't a ton of data
	- Get a large set of treated people, and find control that's on the exact same trend but untreated. On his paper with state legislators, he was able to match very exacctly
- trend inclusion in diff-in-diffs is weird, try to lead with the non-trend regression and then maybe augment with the trends <font color = "red"> what is this </font>


TF Chris and Dan Valentino replicated this paper
- The paper didn't change _their_ minds - that's why they picked it
- assume parties oppose VBM for a relatively sophisticated reason
- they thought design was credible - room for discussion. and an important policy question
- <font color = "red"> what is synthetic control? What is Coarsened Exact Matching? </font>
- Generalized synthetic control - use matching covariates + the outcomes


Soubhik 'fake' lecture

Selection bias
- theoretical basis of sampling: probability samples
- Two approaches:
	- try hard to get random samples, but 90% of people decline
	- Volunteer samples with post-hoc techniques to fix bias
- How to interpret polls? They may well have house effects 
	- Also 'pack polling' - polls tend to be correlated
	- Endogeneity of non-response is a problem

Types of selection
- selection on Y
- selection on X 
- selection on beta

ex: grad school grades ~ GRE
- selected on X - have to get high GRE to get into grad school
- selected on Y - if grades are bad, you get kicked out

Death by survey
- gakidou and king
- demography problem: QOI death rate, proportion who die between times 1 and 2
- sibling survival survey - how many siblings did you have at time 1 and time 2
- what about $\sum$ death/ $\sum$ siblings (at time 1)? can't answer if u are dead...
- also double counting? will always bias upward?
- also sibling death might be correlated to response rate
	- sampling $\propto$ sibship size at time 2, but want time 1
	- are overrepresenting people with bigger sibships at time 2 - we should weight proportionally 
- Sibships with 100% mortality don't get sampled
	- so we have to extrapolate
	- $\ln Y_s$ log deaths in sibships with $s$ survivors
	- $\widehat{\ln Y_s} = \hat{\alpha}_0 + \hat{\alpha}_1 s + \hat{\alpha}_2 s^2$
	- Estimate log deaths in sibships with 0 survivors