---
date updated: 2021-11-07 23:51

notetype: "Math Class Note"
cssclass: math-class-note

tags: 
- '#classnotes'
- '#🚧'
---

# [[2001.14 Research Design]]
Part of [[@Gov 2001 and Stats Index]]


### Notation
- Sample $n$ people from $N$ population. 
- Observe outcome $Y_i$.
- selection indicator $I_i$ which is $1$ if selected and $0$ if not. 
- Treatment indicator $T_i$
- assume for simplicity that treatment/control have size $n/2$. 
- Potential outcomes: $Y_i(1)$ and $Y_i(0)$ - one observed, one counterfactual. The **fundamental problem of causal inference** is that we can only ever see one potential outcome
	- If $T_i = 0$ then $Y_i(0) = y_i$. But $Y_i(1) = ???$
	- Opposite for the control grp
- $I_i$, $T_i$ and $Y_i$ are random even though $Y_i(0)$ and $Y_i(1)$ are fixed - they are fixed functions of a random input


### Quantities of interest
- Treatment effect: $Y_i(1) - Y_i(0)$ for all $i$. Maybe we want the population average treatment effect (PATE), or the sample average treatment effect. 
- We can have an estimator that's the difference in means between treatment and control group
- This estimator is subject to confounders: observed ones $X$ and unobserved ones $U$
- Decomposition: $\Delta = \text{PATE} - D$ where $D$ is difference-in-means (Estimation error)
	- Can decompose $\Delta$ into $\Delta_s$ the sample selection and $\Delta_t$ the treatment imbalance. Each of these can come from observed or unobserved confounders. 
	- We want everything to be 0
- This is the framework to think about research design - eliminating each source of bias. 


### Selection error
- PATE - SATE is $\Delta_S$. Can also think of that as difference between NATE (non-sampled average TE) vs SATE 
	- Can eliminate $\Delta_S$ with a census - observe the whole population
	- If SATE = NATE, then nothing to correct. 
	- If you can switch your QOI to SATE rather than NATE
	- $\Delta_{S_X} = 0$ when the empirical distribution of $X$ is the same in population and in sample
	- $\Delta_{S_U} = 0$ when the empirical distribution of $U$ is the same in population and in sample... hard to get that
	- Unverifiable: $X$ is unobserved out of sample. $U$ is unobserved altogether. 
	- $\Delta_{S_X} \to 0$ if you weight on $X$ based on the population (and you have enough examples to weight)
- $\Delta_T$ 
	- $\Delta_{T_U}$ is $0$ when the empirical distribution of $X$ is the same in treatments and controls. This is verifiable since you see $X$.
		- You can make them the same *ex ante* by "blocking" - take random samples within categories of variables. So don't randomly assign to everyone: randomly assign e.g. within women, or within African-Americans.
		- You can fix things *ex post* with matching or modeling. 
			- Matching is a pruning process - throw out observations till you have balance
			- Modeling: build a model of data with imbalances, then when calculating QOI, set $X_c$ so that the two groups are matched (??)
	- What about $\Delta_{T_U}$? Unverifiable. BUT achievable by assumption or, on average, by random treatment assignment. 
- QOIs for matching: PATT, SATT (Sample Average Treatment effect on the Treated)
	- Analogous error decomposition holds. IDK what it does
- 